Worm ENCODE White Paper, April 18, 2005 Draft

 	The completion of the sequencing of human and model organism 
genomes was only a first step towards understanding how genomes determine 
the complexity of life.  The next step is a multifaceted challenge: to 
define the functional elements present in these sequences using all the 
experimental and computational means at our disposal. In addition to 
protein coding genes, these functional elements include transcriptional 
regulatory elements, RNA genes and other less well-studied types of 
element. The degree of our ignorance is humbling: in mouse-human 
comparisons, 4.5 percent of the genome shows evidence of selection yet 
only 1.5 percent is predicted to encode proteins (Waterston et al., 2002). 
This implies that as much as three percent of mammalian genomes consist of 
non protein-coding functional sequence of the classes listed above. This 
was part of the rationale behind the establishment of the mammalian 
ENCyclopedia Of DNA Elements (ENCODE) project, which is charged with 
characterizing the functional elements in a representative portion of the 
human genome (2004).
Despite the initial success of the human ENCODE approach, the size of 
mammalian genomes, the complexity of their developmental programs, their 
long generation times, and the frequently cumbersome genetic and molecular 
tools available in mammalian systems forces researchers to use indirect 
systems such as cell culture. We believe that a focused effort to identify 
sequence elements in model invertebrates will fill that gap by allowing 
direct ascertainment of the role of the elements in the living organism. 
The resulting advances in knowledge and technology will extend our 
understanding of biological mechanisms and should be applicable to 
improving the quality of human annotations.
We present here the case for the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans as an 
experimental organism especially suitable for a comprehensive study of the 
genome in an extended ENCODE project. We first describe the key attributes 
of C. elegans as a model system and then outline the scope and 
organization a C. elegans ENCODE effort, beginning from what is already 
known of the key elements . An accompanying white paper makes the case for 
including Drosophila melanogaster in such a project.

C. elegans provides a powerful system to complement the human ENCODE 
project

There are both biological and experimental reasons to systematically 
characterize functional genomic sequences in C. elegans.  We elaborate six 
key attributes of the worm that make it a strong model system to 
complement human ENCODE:

1. C. elegans combines metazoan complexity with a simple body plan and 
easily accessible development.  Worms are intermediate in complexity 
between single-celled organisms and mammals. All major animal cell types 
are present, including neurons, muscle cells, epidermal cells, and 
secretory cells.  However, the adult hermaphrodite consists of only 959 
somatic cells, each of which has a unique name, occupies a known position 
in the adult, and originates via an invariant and well-understood 
developmental lineage (Sulston and Horvitz, 1977; Sulston et al., 1983). 
This global view of development led to the discovery of program cell death 
and there is a strong understanding of the mechanisms leading specific 
cells to die during development (Ellis and Horvitz, 1986). Furthermore, 
the complete synaptic wiring diagram of the 302 neurons in adults is known 
(White et al., 1986). These features make it possible to identify every 
cell at any developmental stage, and provide an unambiguous description of 
the developmental status, history and fate of each cell. Many of these 
cells develop under the control of molecular pathways analogous to those 
used for the equivalent cells in mammals.

2. C. elegans provides powerful methods to assay in vivo function. Many 
powerful tools exist to test the functional significance of genes and DNA 
elements at the molecular, cellular and organismal levels in C. elegans. 
Targeted messenger RNAs can be knocked down by using feeding-mediated 
RNAi, a technique that has been successfully scaled up to allow for 
genome-wide RNAi screens (Maeda et al., 2001; Kamath et al., 2003; 
Sonnichsen et al., 2005). Mutated worms can be rapidly screened for 
deletions or point mutations in any gene of interest (The C. elegans 
knockout consortium, http://www.celeganskoconsortium.omrf.org/). 
Transgenic strains can be constructed by either gonad injection 
(Stinchcomb et al., 1985) or ballistic transformation (Wilm et al., 1999; 
Praitis et al., 2001), and though these methods are more cumbersome than 
cell line transfection, both can be scaled up to the whole-genome level. 
Although transformation via homologous integration is inefficient in 
worms, targeted deletions can be efficiently identified in populations 
after EMS mutagenesis, and knock-in alleles can be readily created using 
transposon-mediated gene conversion (Barrett et al., 2004).
The ability to identify individual cells allows detailed analysis of 
cellular phenotypes to be performed in vivo, avoiding the problems 
associated with cell lines that are typically used in mammalian studies. 
While no immortalized C. elegans cell lines exist, cell types expressing 
the appropriately marked genes can be purified by Fluorescence-Activated 
Cell Sorting (FACS) of dissociated embryos. The recovered cells can then 
be studied in primary cell culture (Christensen et al., 2002).
  Most analyses can be conducted at high throughput in C. elegans using 96 
well plates and parallelized study designs. Because the worms are 
hermaphroditic, individual animals can be selected and grown to generate 
clonal stocks.  Strains can be frozen and stored indefinitely, eliminating 
the need for constant breeding and maintenance of archived strains, and 
avoiding de novo genetic mutations and other forms of genetic drift.

3. C. elegans genome sequence and related sequences. C. elegans is the 
only metazoan to have its genome fully sequenced with no gaps.  This 
sequence is currently the most accurate and complete of any animal genome. 
The only structural uncertainty is in the copy number of a small number of 
extensive tandem repeats and the per-nucleotide error rate is estimated at 
about 2.5x10-5 (Koch et al., 2000). All genetics work has been done on the 
background of the sequenced strain, N2 (Brenner, 1974).
In addition whole genome shotgun assemblies for the related nematodes C. 
briggsae (Stein et al., 2003) and C. remanei are available, and the C. 
japonica and C. sp. CB5161 genomes are in production sequencing. More 
distantly related nematodes such as Pristionchus pacificus and Brugia 
malayi have also been scheduled for sequencing.  These additional genomes 
provide C. elegans researchers with an increasingly powerful platform for 
comparative genomics.

4. The human and worm genomes have similar genic complexity. Rapid 
progress is being made towards completing the annotation of protein coding 
genes in C. elegans. Over 17,000 genes have already been at least 
partially validated by mRNAs (Phil Green, personal communication) (Reboul 
et al., 2001; Reboul et al., 2003; Lamesch et al., 2004), which is 
comparable to the 17,727 human splice variants, presumably corresponding 
to a smaller number of genes, that have been verified by the mammalian 
gene collection project (Gerhard et al., 2004). The total gene count 
remains somewhat uncertain but estimates of C. elegans protein coding 
genes are generally close to 20,000 - nearly as many as the 21,000-25,000 
estimated for humans.  The stability of the total gene count reflects the 
high quality of the gene predictions in C. elegans relative to other 
organisms.
In many cases, worm genes are functionally analogous to human genes. 
Approximately 40% of human disease genes have clear orthologs in the worm 
(Tatusov et al., 2003), and human orthologs have been described for over 
9,000 worm genes.  These ortholog sets include the components of most 
well-studied cancer-associated signaling pathways including ras, p53, bcl2 
and BRCA1 (Han and Sternberg, 1990; Hengartner and Horvitz, 1994; 
Schumacher et al., 2001; Boulton et al., 2004). This orthology extends to 
other genomic elements such as noncoding genes; 22 of the 88 microRNAs 
found in one genomic screen had human homologs identifiable by sequence 
and structural conservation (Lim et al., 2003).

5. A high fraction of the C. elegans genome is likely to be functional. 
The worm genome is about 100 megabases in length, about 1/30th the size of 
the human genome. Comparing the C. elegans and C. briggsae genomes 
suggests that about half of the genome is under selection (Stein et al., 
2003), as opposed to the ~5% found in mammals. This means that the total 
information content of the worm genome, defined as the number of bases 
under selection, is approximately one third that of human, packed into a 
genome that is thirty times smaller. For example, the typical intergenic 
sequence is about 1.3 kilobases, and 85% of such sequences are smaller 
than 5 kilobases. Compared to human, whose intergenic sequence is an order 
of magnitude larger, the reduced search space for functional elements will 
greatly reduce the false positive rates for genome-wide assays. Functional 
elements identified in worm can then be related to homologous elements in 
human.

6. The C. elegans research community has a strong track record of 
collaboration and success in large projects. The worm community has always 
championed open information and resource sharing, beginning with the Worm 
Breeders Gazette, where people communicated unpublished data, and 
continuing with the C. elegans Genetics Center (CGC), where people deposit 
and share worm strains.  During the genome project, the cosmid contigs 
built by the mapping centers were associated with the genetic map 
principally by the broader community. Large-scale reagents developed by 
individual labs for functional genomic studies are openly shared; these 
include spotted microarrays (Stuart Kim  whole-genome RNAi libraries 
(Kamath et al., 2003), ORFeome clones (Lamesch et al., 2004) and the 
Promoterome clones (Dupuy et al., 2004).
Today, the C. elegans genome database, WormBase, acts as the repository of 
all genome annotation information in C. elegans, C. briggsae and related 
nematodes (Harris et al., 2004). It curates the definitive list of C. 
elegans gene models and associated functional information from 
high-throughput experiments as well as small-scale experiments reported in 
the literature. Researchers routinely contact WormBase in advance of 
publication of their papers to arrange for the deposition of their data 
sets into the resource.

The C. elegans ENCODE Project

A C. elegans ENCODE project should have as its central goals the 
comprehensive enumeration of the functional elements of the genome and the 
description of their activity throughout the life of the animal at 
cellular resolution.  The latter will provide an important validation of 
the former and will serve as the platform on which to build a full 
molecular description of the biology of the worm.  The results and lessons 
learned will set the stage for an accurate genome-wide human ENCODE 
project.  The elements identified should minimally include:

	All transcribed sequences, including both protein coding and 
non-coding genes.
	All regulatory elements, including both those that act at the DNA 
level to control transcription and those that act at the RNA level, and 
how those elements combine to produce patterns of expression in time and 
space.
	All functional elements that do not fall into one of the above 
categories, in particular those conserved between Caenorhabditis species; 
these include elements involved in DNA replication, inheritance and 
chromatin structure.

A challenge in any program seeking to be comprehensive is how to define 
the goal precisely and to determine when the goal has been reached. 
Protein coding genes represent the most straightforward case and we 
describe possible criteria for achieving comprehensiveness below.  For 
other elements, explicit criteria are more difficult to state, but we 
expect that with increased knowledge of these features, criteria with 
specificity similar to those with protein coding genes will emerge.
Transcribed elements
 	A comprehensive list of transcribed sequences is a critical 
component of any effort to completely describe the information content of 
a genome because these define the effector molecules of the system. two 
broad classes of transcribed elements are protein-coding genes and 
non-coding RNA genes.

Protein-Coding Genes

C. elegans protein gene annotations have been extensively tested and 
refined through a combination of computer programs and experiment, and are 
believed to be of high accuracy.  The current predicted gene set consists 
of 19,727 genes, with 2,641 alternative splice forms, bringing the total 
predicted protein count to 22,368.  Over 17,000 of these genes are 
supported by cDNA cloning and sequencing, genetic or RNAi phenotype, or 
other experiments. Over 12,500 genes have been cloned as full length open 
reading frames in Gateway vectors and these clones are publicly available 
(Reboul et al., 2003). On chromosomes I and II, all the predicted splice 
junctions have been tested and almost all transpliced transcripts 
throughout the genome have been identified (P. Green, personal 
communication).

Evidence suggests that the identification of C. elegans protein-coding 
genes is approaching completeness. Nearly all EST and SAGE tags map to the 
predicted gene set, and a recent survey of the worm proteome using MUD-PIT 
mass spectrometry identified about 3000 distinct proteins, none of which 
were absent from the predicted gene set (Michael MacCoss, personal 
communication).  However, both comparative analysis with C. briggsae, and 
results with improved gene prediction programs suggest there might be as 
many as 1,000 genes not in the current set (Wei et al., 2005).

The worm ENCODE project should aim to find every gene expressed at a level 
higher than one copy per 1000 cells, a level that would ensure that any 
message present in a single copy in only a single cell would be included. 
This goal would be achieved using a variety of experimental and 
computational methods to detect unidentified genes and to assess the 
completeness of the gene set.  Methods for detecting transcripts, such as 
RT-PCR, EST, SAGE and tiling arrays should be evaluated for their 
effectiveness and the best strategy chosen for in depth detection. 
Extensive protein identification by mass spectrometry will provide an 
independent estimate of gene set completeness and will be particularly 
valuable in identifying small coding regions that lack the statistical 
signal to be predicted by gene finding programs. Improved gene prediction 
software should be developed to incorporate such underutilized information 
as sequence conservation in other worm genomes and experimental data, as 
well as to predict transcription start sites and UTR boundaries.  In 
addition, accurate annotation of repetitive DNA sequences is also needed, 
which could not only improve the accuracy of gene prediction, but could 
also reduce the search space for regulatory elements.

RNA Genes

Many transcripts function at the RNA level, including rRNAs, tRNAs, snRNAs 
snoRNAs, and miRNAs.  C. elegans contains all major types of eukaryotic 
RNA genes: over 1400 of these genes have been identified including 570 
tRNAs, 275 rRNAs, and over 120 miRNAs.  Indeed, the entire microRNA 
(miRNA) class of small regulatory RNAs was first identified through C. 
elegans genetics (Lee et al., 1993).  Because miRNAs are small targets, 
miRNA mutations in generalized screens are rarely recovered, but null 
mutations can be obtained in deletion screens and 2.O-methyl 
oligonucleotides can be used to knock down miRNA function (Hutvagner et 
al., 2004).

Comprehensive identification and categorization of non-coding transcripts 
poses a challenge to worm ENCODE because our understanding of the extent 
and nature of these genes is still rapidly evolving. While algorithms for 
predicting tRNAs, snRNAs, snoRNAs and rRNAs are mature and highly 
accurate, the computational prediction of novel types of RNA gene through 
state-of-the-art algorithms that utilize the conservation of secondary 
structure across species is still subject to high false positive rates, 
between ten and 100 per megabase (Rivas and Eddy, 2001).  This means that 
an attempt to run RNA gene prediction software on the entire genome will 
produce 30,000 false positives in the human genome but as little as 500 in 
worms. A worm ENCODE project will need to combine experimental and 
computational techniques in order to exhaustively identify candidate novel 
RNA genes and validate them in vivo.

One phase of this program would be exhaustive RNA transcript detection 
using tiling arrays or a similar technology to provide a list of regions 
of the genome that are undergoing active transcription.  This type of 
screen would be supplemented by more directed approaches such as 
systematic pulldown of protein-RNA complexes. Candidate RNA genes could 
then validated in vivo using targeted deletions and knockdowns, used to 
create training sets for ab initio RNA gene prediction software, and any 
novel genes predicted by the software validated in turn. Once new 
experimentally or computationally-identified noncoding RNA genes are 
identified in C. elegans, they can be used to develop structure-based 
predictions of their homologues in mammals and other organisms, as has 
already been done for tRNAs, snoRNAs and microRNAs.

The worm ENCODE project should include the systematic characterization of 
candidate RNA genes by expression mapping at the single cell level and 
phenotypic characterization of knockouts or knockdowns at both the visible 
and molecular levels. New methods will need to be developed to these 
characterizations possible in a high-throughput automated manner, but 
addressing this challenge in C. elegans should be considerably simpler 
than in mammals.
Regulatory elements

 	In addition to creating a definitive list of coding and non-coding 
genes, another challenge for an ENCODE project is to define the sequence 
elements that control the temporal and spatial expression of the genes. 
Ultimately we would like to decipher both at the individual gene level and 
at the network level how DNA sequence information is translated into gene 
expression patterns through both transcriptional and post-transcriptional 
regulation.  Identifying these elements and the factors that recognize 
them is significantly more challenging than identifying the genes 
themselves, but the worm offers the twin advantages of a relatively small 
sequence space available for regulatory elements and the ability to define 
gene activity with cellular resolution throughout the life cycle.

Transcriptional regulatory elements

A key first step in identifying regions with shared transcriptional 
regulatory elements is to systematically profile patterns of gene 
expression.  In C. elegans, data from over 1000 microarray experiments and 
3.5 million SAGE tags are already available, representing all stages of 
development, mutants lacking specific cell types, and a variety of 
experimental interventions.  Meanwhile, researchers have continued to push 
for higher spatial resolution of expression patterns. Over 10,000 genes 
have been characterized using in situ hybridization techniques (Tabara et 
al., 1996).  Specific embryonic cell types purified by FACS have been 
assayed for gene expression by microarray (Fox et al., 2005) and SAGE(Don 
Moerman, personal communication).  Polyadenylated messages enriched in 
larval or adult cell types have been detected by expressing a tagged 
poly-A binding protein in those cells and pulling down associated mRNAs 
(Lund et al., 2002).  Over 3000 promoter::GFP transgenic lines have been 
generated and their expression examined at the level of single cells or 
cell types (David Bailley, personal communication).

Computational methods have been used to identify co-regulated genes, to 
reveal regulatory motifs and to infer regulatory networks (Beer and 
Tavazoie, 2004; GuhaThakurta et al., 2004; Wenick and Hobert, 2004). 
Comparative analysis with C. briggsae is playing an increasingly important 
role in element identification. A host of highly conserved sequence 
modules have been found by comparing the upstream and intronic regions of 
orthologous C. elegans and C. briggsae protein-coding genes. Analysis of 
these conserved sequence modules have led to element identification 
without prior expression data. The accuracy of this comparative genomic 
analysis will be greatly increased as other nematode sequences become 
available.

Co-expression information has already led to the discovery of 
combinatorial grammars consisting of multiple motifs regulating expression 
in the developing pharynx (Gaudet and Mango, 2002) and in response to heat 
shock (GuhaThakurta et al., 2002).  Parallel to computational analysis, 
experimental methods are also deployed to define regulatory elements; 
binding motifs for the ~600 transcription factors in the worm are being 
systematically dissected by yeast one-hybrid (Deplancke et al., 2004) and 
several groups are developing ways to apply in vitro chromatin 
immunoprecipitation in worms.

 	A worm ENCODE project should attack the problem through a series 
of parallel but interacting investigations:

	Defining expression patterns
	Defining conserved noncoding sequences through comparative 
sequence analysis
	Defining binding specificity for transcription factors
	Detecting in vivo protein-binding site interactions
	Defining co-expressed genes and predicting shared regulatory 
motifs and potential regulatory relationships
	Determining the roles of specific sites and factors in generating 
the expression patterns

The resulting data sets will be integrated and used to develop algorithms 
to model the elements and their activity.

As noted earlier, there are already multiple efforts to characterize the 
expression of genes at the single-cell, tissue and stage levels, but much 
of this work has been done manually and only on a small subset of the 
genes. The worm ENCODE project should extend and automate these efforts in 
order to provide a series of uniform high-quality data sets that span the 
organism.s entire gene complement. To accomplish this will require new 
technologies for automating phenotype analysis, several of which are 
already in the development stage. In one such technology, a modified flow 
cytometer is used to detect reporter gene expression patterns along the 
long axis of the worm, allowing for rapid screening for genes expressed in 
certain anatomic positions and developmental stages. Other techniques in 
development use the invariant developmental lineage to assign observed 
gene expression to known cells at single cell resolution and high temporal 
resolution. In one version, an embryo expressing histone-GFP in every cell 
is imaged by 3D-confocal microscopy and analyzed using custom image 
analysis software. The software then regenerates the lineage by tracking 
nuclei between time points. A second color reporter driven by a promoter 
of interest can then be assigned to individual cells in the lineage, 
allowing the temporal expression of a gene to be monitored on a 
cell-by-cell basis during the course of embryogenesis. A complementary 
approach is to characterize the transcription complement of marked cell 
types that have been purified via FACS.  Together, these technologies have 
the potential for highly automated gene expression analysis.

 	As we develop a comprehensive list of the expression patterns of 
genes, the project will use computational methods to identify candidate 
shared sequence motifs that are contained in subsets of coexpressed genes. 
The accuracy of such predictions will benefit greatly from comparative 
analyses using conserved regions from other sequenced nematodes.

 	Once the regulatory elements have been identified, we will want to 
identify the transcription factors that bind to them and affect the 
transcription pattern. The approximately 600 transcription factors thought 
to exist in C. elegans can be expressed, purified and used to select in 
vitro for binding sequences such as by  SELEX/SAGE , yeast one-hybrid, or 
DNA immunoprecipitation.  In vivo utilization of binding sites can be 
detected by chromatin immunoprecipitation with antibodies against the 
native proteins or in strains expressing tagged versions, with the 
associated DNA identified by microarray hybridization, quatititative PCR 
or SAGE.

RNA regulatory elements

Many motifs encoded in DNA within genes act at the RNA level to regulate 
splicing, localization, translation, RNA editing, or other processes. 
These represent important regulatory features within the genome and should 
be included in a comprehensive effort to map functional sequences.  The C. 
elegans genome contains roughly 300 RNA binding proteins.  Genetic, 
biochemical and computational analyses have also revealed critical roles 
of protein-RNA complexes, 3. untranslated regions, RNA binding proteins 
(and their targets) and RNA-RNA interactions in development.

RNA regulatory elements can be studied in largely the same fashion as the 
transcriptional regulatory elements: sequence conservation can be used to 
identify candidate elements; pulldown experiments can link RNA binding 
proteins to their target genes and candidate motifs; function can be 
assayed by fusions with reporter proteins.

A complication for defining the RNA regulatory elements is that the 
regulatory information usually resides inside the three-dimensional RNA 
secondary structure rather than encoded directly in the primary sequence. 
This makes it more difficult to predict regulatory elements 
computationally. The computational prediction of RNA regulatory elements 
must proceed hand-in-hand with the structural analysis of the RNA genes 
that regulate them. An important goal of the worm ENCODE project would be 
to develop an experimentally-determined data set of regulatory targets and 
their corresponding RNA genes in order to inform the development of new 
computational models of their interactions.

Elucidation of gene networks

As the project progresses, a regulatory network will begin to emerge. A 
network that integrates the regulatory relationships and functions of each 
element in the genome in every cell over the life of the worm would be the 
ultimate result of this project, as well as the foundation for the next 
phase of genome biology.  Theories and computational tools should be 
developed to integrate high-throughput data into networks, to understand 
the regulatory grammars and organizing principles and to detect elements, 
sub-nets as well as grammars that are conserved in other organisms. 
Understanding the mode of conservation would be critical in our effort to 
understand the human genome as well as general principles governing 
biology.

 	Because C. elegans allows researchers to perform in vivo assays at 
genomic scales, systematic testing of regulatory predictions is possible. 
This would include assaying the role of any transcription factor on 
potential targets by measuring the activity of promoter:reporter 
constructs after treatment with RNAi against the transcription factor. 
Global measurement might be obtained by using a series of strains, each 
expressing a different promoter:reporter fusion, arrayed in 96 well plates 
and fed RNAi targeting each factor of interest.

The experimental and computational prediction of regulatory networks will 
benefit tremendously from forty years of C. elegans genetics, which has 
laid a sound foundation to interpret high-throughput data in terms of 
regulatory networks.  Many lineage defining master transcriptional 
regulators have been characterized experimentally, such as pal-1 for the C 
lineage, end-1 for the E lineage, hlh-1 for muscle lineages and pha-4 for 
pharyngeal lineages. These well-understood pathways can be used to 
evaluate the accuracy and completeness of computationally-derived 
networks, as well as to inform successive algorithmic refinements.

Other elements

While most attention is focused on genes and the elements that regulate 
their activity, the C. elegans genome also contains sequences that are 
directly important for its own maintenance, such as origins of 
replication, centromeres and telomeres.  Other chromosomal-maintenance 
elements may include those controlling X chromosome inactivation/dosage 
compensation, nucleosome positioning and heterochromatin regulation, 
position-specific variations in mutation and recombination rates, and 
higher order chromosomal packing within the nucleus. Among these, the best 
understood case of discrete elements controlling chromosomal function in 
C. elegans is the X-recognition element that mediates the dosage 
compensation of genes on chromosome X (Csankovszki et al., 2004).

The comparison of the 5 worm genomes will undoubtedly yield conserved 
elements that cannot be accounted for by one of the above classes of 
functional elements.  These can be tested for function using the full 
array of tools available in the worm.  These could include sequences 
controlling DNA replication and recombination, dosage compensation and 
inheritance.  Sequences that might explain the distinctive differences in 
behavior between chromosome arms and centers in C. elegans would be one 
interesting target.
Coordination of efforts

A worm model organism ENCODE project could take advantage of the breadth 
and the collaborative nature of the C. elegans research community.  To 
maximize efficiency, certain core resources should be made available for 
all ENCODE researchers (and the community where possible).  These include:

	Full genome tiling microarrays
	Affinity reagents such as antibodies or tagged strains for all of 
the transcription factors and RNA binding proteins
	Knockout strains for predicted regulatory genes
	Open reading frame, full gene, and intergenic clones
	Transgenic worms expressing reporter genes under the control of 
candidate regulatory regions

This coordination should also occur at the informatics level as well.  We 
consider it highly desirable that the worm ENCODE project should develop a 
common database that is shared with Drosophila ENCODE and other organism 
ENCODE projects. This would maximize the ability to migrate information 
across species, and allow one organism ENCODE project easy access to the 
experimental resources developed by another project. Recent developments 
in data model sharing, notably the Sequence Ontology of functional 
elements and the development of a common model organism database schema 
under the GMOD project, make this a realistic expectation.

Individual labs can be funded to use these experimental and information 
resources for systematic studies of elements or for new method 
development.  Certain projects, such as biochemical determination of 
transcription factor binding specificities, antibody generation, etc are 
species-independent and a single mod-ENCODE/ENCODE grant recipient might 
perform these projects for all species simultaneously.
Conclusion

We have presented reasons why C. elegans should be included in a model 
organism ENCODE effort, which in turn could guide future expansion of the 
human ENCODE project. The worm combines a simple genome and development 
with animal complexity. We believe that because of these factors and the 
wealth of experimental methods there is no better system in which to 
understand animal genome function in vivo.

While worm has unique contributions to offer the overall effort to define 
functional elements in genomic sequences, a broader approach exploiting 
advantages of other organisms, will likely provide the highest quality 
information.  For example, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Drosophila 
melanogaster should be similarly leveraged for their strengths. For 
example, Drosophila has stable cell lines that could be used to test the 
types of cell line-based methods being used in human on a simpler genome, 
and yeast is in a position to synthesize the vast amounts of data that are 
already available to determine higher order rules of eukaryotic genome 
function.  Doing this work in multiple organisms will also provide 
information about how well the general principles uncovered are conserved 
between diverse phyla.

The ENCODE project we envision would provide a critical set of resources 
in the form of detailed high quality genome annotations that will 
ultimately be the basis for developing comprehensive models of development 
and animal life. Just as was true for the genome sequencing projects, an 
effort to comprehensively understand genome function in model organisms 
will provide both technological and biological insight that will 
ultimately lead to a better understanding of our own genome.

References
Barrett, P.L., Fleming, J.T., and Gobel, V. (2004). Targeted gene 
alteration in Caenorhabditis elegans by gene conversion. Nat Genet 36, 
1231-1237.
Beer, M.A., and Tavazoie, S. (2004). Predicting gene expression from 
sequence. Cell 117, 185-198.
Boulton, S.J., Martin, J.S., Polanowska, J., Hill, D.E., Gartner, A., and 
Vidal, M. (2004). BRCA1/BARD1 orthologs required for DNA repair in 
Caenorhabditis elegans. Curr Biol 14, 33-39.
Brenner, S. (1974). The genetics of Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 77, 
71-94.
Christensen, M., Estevez, A., Yin, X., Fox, R., Morrison, R., McDonnell, 
M., Gleason, C., Miller, D.M., 3rd, and Strange, K. (2002). A primary 
culture system for functional analysis of C. elegans neurons and muscle 
cells. Neuron 33, 503-514.
Csankovszki, G., McDonel, P., and Meyer, B.J. (2004). Recruitment and 
spreading of the C. elegans dosage compensation complex along X 
chromosomes. Science 303, 1182-1185.
Deplancke, B., Dupuy, D., Vidal, M., and Walhout, A.J. (2004). A 
gateway-compatible yeast one-hybrid system. Genome Res 14, 2093-2101.
Dupuy, D., Li, Q.R., Deplancke, B., Boxem, M., Hao, T., Lamesch, P., 
Sequerra, R., Bosak, S., Doucette-Stamm, L., Hope, I.A., Hill, D.E., 
Walhout, A.J., and Vidal, M. (2004). A first version of the Caenorhabditis 
elegans Promoterome. Genome Res 14, 2169-2175.
Ellis, H.M., and Horvitz, H.R. (1986). Genetic control of programmed cell 
death in the nematode C. elegans. Cell 44, 817-829.
Fox, R.M., Von Stetina, S.E., Barlow, S.J., Shaffer, C., Olszewski, K.L., 
Moore, J.H., Dupuy, D., Vidal, M., and Miller, D.M., 3rd. (2005). A gene 
expression fingerprint of C. elegans embryonic motor neurons. BMC Genomics 
6, 42.
Gaudet, J., and Mango, S.E. (2002). Regulation of organogenesis by the 
Caenorhabditis elegans FoxA protein PHA-4. Science 295, 821-825.
Gerhard, D.S., Wagner, L., Feingold, E.A., Shenmen, C.M., Grouse, L.H., 
Schuler, G., Klein, S.L., Old, S., Rasooly, R., Good, P., Guyer, M., Peck, 
A.M., Derge, J.G., Lipman, D., Collins, F.S., Jang, W., Sherry, S., Feolo, 
M., Misquitta, L., Lee, E., Rotmistrovsky, K., Greenhut, S.F., Schaefer, 
C.F., Buetow, K., Bonner, T.I., Haussler, D., Kent, J., Kiekhaus, M., 
Furey, T., Brent, M., Prange, C., Schreiber, K., Shapiro, N., Bhat, N.K., 
Hopkins, R.F., Hsie, F., Driscoll, T., Soares, M.B., Casavant, T.L., 
Scheetz, T.E., Brown-stein, M.J., Usdin, T.B., Toshiyuki, S., Carninci, 
P., Piao, Y., Dudekula, D.B., Ko, M.S., Kawakami, K., Suzuki, Y., Sugano, 
S., Gruber, C.E., Smith, M.R., Simmons, B., Moore, T., Waterman, R., 
Johnson, S.L., Ruan, Y., Wei, C.L., Mathavan, S., Gunaratne, P.H., Wu, J., 
Garcia, A.M., Hulyk, S.W., Fuh, E., Yuan, Y., Sneed, A., Kowis, C., 
Hodgson, A., Muzny, D.M., McPherson, J., Gibbs, R.A., Fahey, J., Helton, 
E., Ketteman, M., Madan, A., Rodrigues, S., Sanchez, A., Whiting, M., 
Madari, A., Young, A.C., Wetherby, K.D., Granite, S.J., Kwong, P.N., 
Brinkley, C.P., Pearson, R.L., Bouffard, G.G., Blakesly, R.W., Green, 
E.D., Dickson, M.C., Rodriguez, A.C., Grimwood, J., Schmutz, J., Myers, 
R.M., Butterfield, Y.S., Griffith, M., Griffith, O.L., Krzywinski, M.I., 
Liao, N., Morrin, R., Palmquist, D., Petrescu, A.S., Skalska, U., Smailus, 
D.E., Stott, J.M., Schnerch, A., Schein, J.E., Jones, S.J., Holt, R.A., 
Baross, A., Marra, M.A., Clifton, S., Makowski, K.A., Bosak, S., and 
Malek, J. (2004). The status, quality, and expansion of the NIH 
full-length cDNA project: the Mammalian Gene Collection (MGC). Genome Res 
14, 2121-2127.
GuhaThakurta, D., Palomar, L., Stormo, G.D., Tedesco, P., Johnson, T.E., 
Walker, D.W., Lithgow, G., Kim, S., and Link, C.D. (2002). Identification 
of a novel cis-regulatory element involved in the heat shock response in 
Caenorhabditis elegans using microarray gene expression and computational 
methods.[erratum appears in Genome Res 2002 Aug;12(8):1301]. Genome 
Research 12, 701-712.
GuhaThakurta, D., Schriefer, L.A., Waterston, R.H., and Stormo, G.D. 
(2004). Novel transcription regulatory elements in Caenorhabditis elegans 
muscle genes. Genome Res 14, 2457-2468.
Han, M., and Sternberg, P.W. (1990). let-60, a gene that specifies cell 
fates during C. elegans vulval induction, encodes a ras protein. Cell 63, 
921-931.
Harris, T.W., Chen, N., Cunningham, F., Tello-Ruiz, M., Antoshechkin, I., 
Bastiani, C., Bieri, T., Blasiar, D., Bradnam, K., Chan, J., Chen, C.K., 
Chen, W.J., Davis, P., Kenny, E., Kishore, R., Lawson, D., Lee, R., 
Muller, H.M., Nakamura, C., Ozersky, P., Petcherski, A., Rogers, A., Sabo, 
A., Schwarz, E.M., Van Auken, K., Wang, Q., Durbin, R., Spieth, J., 
Sternberg, P.W., and Stein, L.D. (2004). WormBase: a multi-species 
resource for nematode biology and genomics. Nucleic Acids Res 32 Database 
issue, D411-417.
Hengartner, M.O., and Horvitz, H.R. (1994). C. elegans cell survival gene 
ced-9 encodes a functional homolog of the mammalian proto-oncogene bcl-2. 
Cell 76, 665-676.
Hutvagner, G., Simard, M.J., Mello, C.C., and Zamore, P.D. (2004). 
Sequence-specific inhibition of small RNA function. PLoS Biol 2, E98.
Kamath, R.S., Fraser, A.G., Dong, Y., Poulin, G., Durbin, R., Gotta, M., 
Kanapin, A., Le Bot, N., Moreno, S., Sohrmann, M., Welchman, D.P., 
Zipperlen, P., and Ahringer, J. (2003). Systematic functional analysis of 
the Caenorhabditis elegans genome using RNAi. Nature 421, 231-237.
Koch, R., van Luenen, H.G., van der Horst, M., Thijssen, K.L., and 
Plasterk, R.H. (2000). Single nucleotide polymorphisms in wild isolates of 
Caenorhabditis elegans. Genome Res 10, 1690-1696.
Lamesch, P., Milstein, S., Hao, T., Rosenberg, J., Li, N., Sequerra, R., 
Bosak, S., Doucette-Stamm, L., Vandenhaute, J., Hill, D.E., and Vidal, M. 
(2004). C. elegans ORFeome version 3.1: increasing the coverage of ORFeome 
resources with improved gene predictions. Genome Res 14, 2064-2069.
Lee, R.C., Feinbaum, R.L., and Ambros, V. (1993). The C. elegans 
heterochronic gene lin-4 encodes small RNAs with antisense complementarity 
to lin-14. Cell 75, 843-854.
Lim, L.P., Lau, N.C., Weinstein, E.G., Abdelhakim, A., Yekta, S., Rhoades, 
M.W., Burge, C.B., and Bartel, D.P. (2003). The microRNAs of 
Caenorhabditis elegans. Genes Dev 17, 991-1008.
Lund, J., Tedesco, P., Duke, K., Wang, J., Kim, S.K., and Johnson, T.E. 
(2002). Transcriptional profile of aging in C. elegans. Current Biology 
12, 1566-1573.
Maeda, I., Kohara, Y., Yamamoto, M., and Sugimoto, A. (2001). Large-scale 
analysis of gene function in Caenorhabditis elegans by high-throughput 
RNAi. Curr Biol 11, 171-176.
Praitis, V., Casey, E., Collar, D., and Austin, J. (2001). Creation of 
low-copy integrated transgenic lines in Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 
157, 1217-1226.
Reboul, J., Vaglio, P., Rual, J.F., Lamesch, P., Martinez, M., Armstrong, 
C.M., Li, S., Jacotot, L., Bertin, N., Janky, R., Moore, T., Hudson, J.R., 
Jr., Hartley, J.L., Brasch, M.A., Vandenhaute, J., Boulton, S., Endress, 
G.A., Jenna, S., Chevet, E., Papasotiropoulos, V., Tolias, P.P., Ptacek, 
J., Snyder, M., Huang, R., Chance, M.R., Lee, H., Doucette-Stamm, L., 
Hill, D.E., and Vidal, M. (2003). C. elegans ORFeome version 1.1: 
experimental verification of the genome annotation and resource for 
proteome-scale protein expression. Nat Genet 34, 35-41.
Reboul, J., Vaglio, P., Tzellas, N., Thierry-Mieg, N., Moore, T., Jackson, 
C., Shin-i, T., Kohara, Y., Thierry-Mieg, D., Thierry-Mieg, J., Lee, H., 
Hitti, J., Doucette-Stamm, L., Hartley, J.L., Temple, G.F., Brasch, M.A., 
Vandenhaute, J., Lamesch, P.E., Hill, D.E., and Vidal, M. (2001). 
Open-reading-frame sequence tags (OSTs) support the existence of at least 
17,300 genes in C. elegans. Nat Genet 27, 332-336.
Rivas, E., and Eddy, S.R. (2001). Noncoding RNA gene detection using 
comparative sequence analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 2, 8.
Schumacher, B., Hofmann, K., Boulton, S., and Gartner, A. (2001). The C. 
elegans homolog of the p53 tumor suppressor is required for DNA 
damage-induced apoptosis. Curr Biol 11, 1722-1727.
Sonnichsen, B., Koski, L.B., Walsh, A., Marschall, P., Neumann, B., Brehm, 
M., Alleaume, A.M., Artelt, J., Bettencourt, P., Cassin, E., Hewitson, M., 
Holz, C., Khan, M., Lazik, S., Martin, C., Nitzsche, B., Ruer, M., 
Stamford, J., Winzi, M., Heinkel, R., Roder, M., Finell, J., Hantsch, H., 
Jones, S.J., Jones, M., Piano, F., Gunsalus, K.C., Oegema, K., Gonczy, P., 
Coulson, A., Hyman, A.A., and Echeverri, C.J. (2005). Full-genome RNAi 
profiling of early embryogenesis in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature 434, 
462-469.
Stein, L.D., Bao, Z., Blasiar, D., Blumenthal, T., Brent, M.R., Chen, N., 
Chinwalla, A., Clarke, L., Clee, C., Coghlan, A., Coulson, A., 
D'Eustachio, P., Fitch, D.H., Fulton, L.A., Fulton, R.E., Griffiths-Jones, 
S., Harris, T.W., Hillier, L.W., Kamath, R., Kuwabara, P.E., Mardis, E.R., 
Marra, M.A., Miner, T.L., Minx, P., Mullikin, J.C., Plumb, R.W., Rogers, 
J., Schein, J.E., Sohrmann, M., Spieth, J., Stajich, J.E., Wei, C., 
Willey, D., Wilson, R.K., Durbin, R., and Waterston, R.H. (2003). The 
Genome Sequence of Caenorhabditis briggsae: A Platform for Comparative 
Genomics. PLoS Biol 1, E45.
Stinchcomb, D.T., Shaw, J.E., Carr, S.H., and Hirsh, D. (1985). 
Extrachromosomal DNA transformation of Caenorhabditis elegans. Mol Cell 
Biol 5, 3484-3496.
Sulston, J.E., and Horvitz, H.R. (1977). Post-embryonic cell lineages of 
the nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans. Developmental Biology 56, 110-156.
Sulston, J.E., Schierenberg, E., White, J.G., and Thomson, J.N. (1983). 
The embryonic cell lineage of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. 
Developmental Biology 100, 64-119.
Tabara, H., Motohashi, T., and Kohara, Y. (1996). A multi-well version of 
in situ hybridization on whole mount embryos of Caenorhabditis elegans. 
Nucleic Acids Res 24, 2119-2124.
Tatusov, R.L., Fedorova, N.D., Jackson, J.D., Jacobs, A.R., Kiryutin, B., 
Koonin, E.V., Krylov, D.M., Mazumder, R., Mekhedov, S.L., Nikolskaya, 
A.N., Rao, B.S., Smirnov, S., Sverdlov, A.V., Vasudevan, S., Wolf, Y.I., 
Yin, J.J., and Natale, D.A. (2003). The COG database: an updated version 
includes eukaryotes. BMC Bioinformatics 4, 41.
The_C._elegans_knockout_consortium. 
"http://www.celeganskoconsortium.omrf.org/".
The_ENCODE_(ENCyclopedia_Of_DNA_Elements)_Project. (2004). Science 306, 
636-640.
Waterston, R.H., Lindblad-Toh, K., Birney, E., Rogers, J., Abril, J.F., 
Agarwal, P., Agarwala, R., Ainscough, R., Alexandersson, M., An, P., 
Antonarakis, S.E., Attwood, J., Baertsch, R., Bailey, J., Barlow, K., 
Beck, S., Berry, E., Birren, B., Bloom, T., Bork, P., Botcherby, M., Bray, 
N., Brent, M.R., Brown, D.G., Brown, S.D., Bult, C., Burton, J., Butler, 
J., Campbell, R.D., Carninci, P., Cawley, S., Chiaromonte, F., Chinwalla, 
A.T., Church, D.M., Clamp, M., Clee, C., Collins, F.S., Cook, L.L., 
Copley, R.R., Coulson, A., Couronne, O., Cuff, J., Curwen, V., Cutts, T., 
Daly, M., David, R., Davies, J., Delehaunty, K.D., Deri, J., Dermitzakis, 
E.T., Dewey, C., Dickens, N.J., Diekhans, M., Dodge, S., Dubchak, I., 
Dunn, D.M., Eddy, S.R., Elnitski, L., Emes, R.D., Eswara, P., Eyras, E., 
Felsenfeld, A., Fewell, G.A., Flicek, P., Foley, K., Frankel, W.N., 
Fulton, L.A., Fulton, R.S., Furey, T.S., Gage, D., Gibbs, R.A., Glusman, 
G., Gnerre, S., Goldman, N., Goodstadt, L., Grafham, D., Graves, T.A., 
Green, E.D., Gregory, S., Guigo, R., Guyer, M., Hardison, R.C., Haussler, 
D., Hayashizaki, Y., Hillier, L.W., Hinrichs, A., Hlavina, W., Holzer, T., 
Hsu, F., Hua, A., Hubbard, T., Hunt, A., Jackson, I., Jaffe, D.B., 
Johnson, L.S., Jones, M., Jones, T.A., Joy, A., Kamal, M., Karlsson, E.K., 
Karolchik, D., Kasprzyk, A., Kawai, J., Keibler, E., Kells, C., Kent, 
W.J., Kirby, A., Kolbe, D.L., Korf, I., Kucherlapati, R.S., Kulbokas, 
E.J., Kulp, D., Landers, T., Leger, J.P., Leonard, S., Letunic, I., 
Levine, R., Li, J., Li, M., Lloyd, C., Lucas, S., Ma, B., Maglott, D.R., 
Mardis, E.R., Matthews, L., Mauceli, E., Mayer, J.H., McCarthy, M., 
McCombie, W.R., McLaren, S., McLay, K., McPherson, J.D., Meldrim, J., 
Meredith, B., Mesirov, J.P., Miller, W., Miner, T.L., Mongin, E., 
Montgomery, K.T., Morgan, M., Mott, R., Mullikin, J.C., Muzny, D.M., Nash, 
W.E., Nelson, J.O., Nhan, M.N., Nicol, R., Ning, Z., Nusbaum, C., 
O'Connor, M.J., Okazaki, Y., Oliver, K., Overton-Larty, E., Pachter, L., 
Parra, G., Pepin, K.H., Peterson, J., Pevzner, P., Plumb, R., Pohl, C.S., 
Poliakov, A., Ponce, T.C., Ponting, C.P., Potter, S., Quail, M., Reymond, 
A., Roe, B.A., Roskin, K.M., Rubin, E.M., Rust, A.G., Santos, R., 
Sapojnikov, V., Schultz, B., Schultz, J., Schwartz, M.S., Schwartz, S., 
Scott, C., Seaman, S., Searle, S., Sharpe, T., Sheridan, A., Shownkeen, 
R., Sims, S., Singer, J.B., Slater, G., Smit, A., Smith, D.R., Spencer, 
B., Stabenau, A., Stange-Thomann, N., Sugnet, C., Suyama, M., Tesler, G., 
Thompson, J., Torrents, D., Trevaskis, E., Tromp, J., Ucla, C., 
Ureta-Vidal, A., Vinson, J.P., Von Niederhausern, A.C., Wade, C.M., Wall, 
M., Weber, R.J., Weiss, R.B., Wendl, M.C., West, A.P., Wetterstrand, K., 
Wheeler, R., Whelan, S., Wierzbowski, J., Willey, D., Williams, S., 
Wilson, R.K., Winter, E., Worley, K.C., Wyman, D., Yang, S., Yang, S.P., 
Zdobnov, E.M., Zody, M.C., Lander, E.S., and Mouse Genome Sequencing, C. 
(2002). Initial sequencing and comparative analysis of the mouse 
genome.[comment]. Nature 420, 520-562.
Wei, C., Lamesch, P., Arumugam, M., Rosenberg, J., Hu, P., Vidal, M., and 
Brent, M.R. (2005). Closing in on the C. elegans ORFeome by cloning 
TWINSCAN predictions. Genome Res 15, 577-582.
Wenick, A.S., and Hobert, O. (2004). Genomic cis-regulatory architecture 
and trans-acting regulators of a single interneuron-specific gene battery 
in C. elegans. Dev Cell 6, 757-770.
White, J.G., Southgate, E., Thomson, J.N., and Brenner, S. (1986). The 
Structure of the Nervous System of the Nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. 
Phil. Trans. Royal Soc. London. 314, 1-340.
Wilm, T., Demel, P., Koop, H.U., Schnabel, H., and Schnabel, R. (1999). 
Ballistic transformation of Caenorhabditis elegans. Gene 229, 31-35.


