#!/usr/bin/perl -w

# ====================================================
# Author: Jack Chen (chenn@cshl.org)
# $Id: data_mining.pod,v 1.1.1.1 2010-01-25 15:40:07 tharris Exp $
# Copyright @ 2004 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
# ====================================================

=pod

=head1 WormBase as a Data Mining Platform

WormBase (http://www.wormbase.org) is a central data repository of the biology
and genomics information for I<C. elegans> and related nematodes including 
I<C. briggsae>, I<C. remanei>, and I<C. japonica>. WormBase is not just a data
resource, it also serves as a data mining platform, providing multiple methods 
of searching and downloading data. Currently, there are five major methods of
accessing WormBase. Different methods address different purposes and come with 
their advantages and limitations and can compensate each other. Users can choose 
these methods according to their experience and projects. 

=head2 Website Browsing

This is a one-item-at-a-time approach. WormBase users typically enter WormBase 
from the front page, searching the gene (or other items) of interests in the 
search box. Alternatively, users can open the WormBase site map by clicking on 
the link at the top navigational banner and enter a specific web page for 
searching.  Once the users find their item of interest, they can browse related 
web pages by following the links. The advantage of working with WormBase this 
way is that the users can get detailed views and information about the item of 
interests. The limitation is that the users can only view one item at a time.

=head2 Batch Retrieving

Increasingly more WormBase users are not satisfied with the above one-item-at-a-time 
approach, they are more interested in working with multiple items as a batch. To 
address this need, WormBase provides two web search pages: 'Batch Genes' and 
'Batch Sequences'.  The 'Batch Genes' page allows users to retrieve basically all 
aspects of information about genes, ranging from external database IDs, WormBase IDs, 
protein motifs, GO terms, genomic positions, phenotypes, to DNA and protein sequences.  
The users have options to download the results into plain text format, for 
HTML format. The 'Batch Sequences' page is ideal for retrieving sequences other 
than genes and coding sequences, such as UTRs, introns, promoter elements, etc. 
Both pages can be readily accessed from the top navigational banner. The benefit of 
this method of searching is that it returns the users results for a large number of 
items (genes). The drawback is that it does not provide users with graphical 
representations of the features.  

=head2 Query language searching

For users who are comfortable with ACeDB database query languages and familiar 
with WormBase database models, query languages searching represents a quick and 
versatile method of searching WormBase.  Two query language search pages have 
been designed at WormBase, for Wormbase Query Language, an old style Ace Query 
Language, and AQL, an ACeDB Query Language, respectively.  These pages can be 
accessed from the WormBase 'Site Map' page. For users who are not yet familiar 
with these but would like to give them a try, these search pages provides 
instructions and example queries. The major benefit is that users can formulate 
their own queries. Another advantage is that users can query the databases for 
the new datasets that their corresponding searching pages have not yet been 
designed. The drawback is that users need to invest some time and effort to 
learn to work with the query language(s). The search results are not shown with 
graphics and links.

=head2 FTP downloading

Alternatively, the users can download whole gene sets or even the whole database 
itself. The advantage of this method is that users don't have to rely on the 
Internet for data retrieving, so that their data processing is not limited by 
Internet access and is therefore faster. Problems associated with this method 
are that users need to be very familiar with the nature of the data sets and 
the database models.

=head2 Programmatic accessing

For more advanced WormBase users who knows script programming, WormBase Consortium 
has designated a new server (http://aceserver.cshl.org) for a public WormBase 
database, so that WormBase users can access the backend databases directly and 
remotely via the Internet. The instructions below , together with a scripts 
repository directory for reusable Perl scripts (http://www.perl.org) will be a good
starting point for users who are interesting mining WormBase this way. Users can run 
these scripts on their local machines. Users can also write their own scripts 
using these scripts as examples and starting templates. The biggest advantage 
for this method is that users can query, format and process the search results 
to the extend they desire. An obvious drawback is that users need to learn some 
programming. Since the establishment of the open database server, more and more 
WormBase users turn to this method.   

In the following sections, we will describe how to mine WormBase using programs. 

=head1 Mining WormBase with AcePerl

WormBase can be queried from the command line using AcePerl. This allows you to 
write sophisticated Perl scripts to mine WormBase. For details, see the AcePerl 
document (http://stein.cshl.org/AcePerl/) for information on downloading, installing 
and using this software. 

=head2 Public Access AcePerl Server

=over 4

=item *

Location: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, NY

=item *

Host: aceserver.cshl.org

=item *

Port: 2005

=back

Be aware that you will be sharing this server with other people. If it seems 
slow, it may be because others are using it. Wait a while and try again. 

=head3 Example: Mining WormBase Using AcePerl


	1	#!/usr/bin/perl -w
	2	use strict; 
	3	use Ace;
        4
	5	my $db = Ace->connect(	-port => '2005', 
       	6		               	-host => 'aceserver.cshl.org');
        7
        8	print "\tCDS\tProtein\n";
	9	my @CDSs = $db->fetch(CDS=>'AH*');
	10	map {print "\t", 
        11   	           $_, "\t", 
        12                 $_->Corresponding_protein, "\n"
        13         if $_->Corresponding_protein;}@CDSs;

=head3 Example Result

	CDS     Protein
	AH6.1   WP:CE01450
	AH6.2   WP:CE01456
	AH6.3   WP:CE01457
	AH6.4   WP:CE01458
	AH6.5   WP:CE26846
	AH6.5:wp12      WP:CE01459
	AH6.5:wp43      WP:CE15550
	AH6.6   WP:CE01460
	AH6.7   WP:CE01461
	AH6.8   WP:CE01462
	AH6.9:wp95      WP:CE01463
	AH6.10  WP:CE01451
	AH6.11  WP:CE01452
	AH6.12  WP:CE01453
	AH6.13:wp11     WP:CE01454
	AH6.13:wp95     WP:CE07654
	AH6.14  WP:CE01455
	AH9.1   WP:CE03857
	AH9.2   WP:CE03858
	AH9.3   WP:CE03859
	AH9.4   WP:CE30841
	AH10.1  WP:CE07655
	AH10.2  WP:CE07656
	AH10.3  WP:CE07657
	AH10.4  WP:CE07658
	AH10.5a:wp13    WP:CE07659
	AH10.5a:wp17    WP:CE17313
	AH10.5b:wp17    WP:CE07660
	AH10.5c:wp13    WP:CE07661


=head3 Code Explanation

=head1 Mining WormBase with Bio::DB::GFF

The BioPerl library (http://www.bioperl.org) provides a simple relational schema 
and database access layer for querying genomic features. This is the access method 
of choice to use for mining WormBase for: 

=over 4

=item *

Spliced and unspliced genes. 

=item *

UTRs, upstream regions or introns. 

=item * 

Searching for annotations that overlap one another, for example, finding all genes that are in an intron of another gene. 

=item * 

Comparing syntenic regions of the I<C. elegans> and I<C. briggsae> genomes. 

=back

=head2 Public Access Bio::DB::GFF Servers

=over 4

=item *

Location: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, NY

=item *

dsn: 'dbi:mysql:elegans:aceservcer.cshl.org' (for database 'elegans')

dsn: 'dbi:mysql:briggsae:aceservcer.cshl.org' (for database 'briggsae')

=item *

user: 'anonymous'

=item *

pass: ''

=back

=head1 Data Mining Scripts 

WormBase maintains a growing number of Perl scripts, which users can download to
their local computers and run. By default, these scripts connect to the public 
WormBase database server (http://aceserver.cshl.org). Users are encourage to run, 
modify and distribute these scripts. One friendly reminder is that users should 
exercise courtesy when run these scripts so that all WormBase users can have fair
shares of the server. If you find yourself running scripts too often and the aceserver
is slowing down, it is a good time to consider installing a local WormBase server!

=head1 Author

 Author: Jack Chen (chenn@cshl.org)
 $Id: data_mining.pod,v 1.1.1.1 2010-01-25 15:40:07 tharris Exp $
 $Date: 2010-01-25 15:40:07 $
 
 Copyright @ 2004 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory

=cut

